>> Ifill: PRESIDENT OBAMA IN
EUROPE TODAY STOOD IN SOLIDARITY
WITH UKRAINE'S NEWLY ELECTED
PRESIDENT, PLEDGING TO BEEF UP
MILITARY AID AS THE COUNTRY
STRUGGLES TO QUELL A BLOODY PRO-
RUSSIAN REBELLION.
GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
ALSO AHEAD, AS THE DUST SETTLES
AFTER TUESDAY'S PRIMARY
ELECTIONS, A RUNOFF IN
MISSISSIPPI BETWEEN A TEA PARTY
FAVORITE AND THE OLD-GUARD
ESTABLISHMENT EXPOSES THE
G.O.P.'S INTERNAL RIFTS.
>> Ifill: PLUS, FACTORIES IN
SOUTH CAROLINA OFFER STUDENTS
ON-THE-JOB TRAINING AND A
VOCATIONAL DEGREE.
WE EXPLORE HOW APPRENTICESHIPS
CAN HELP SOLVE YOUTH
UNEMPLOYMENT AND SHAPE 21ST
CENTURY WORKERS.
>> THERE'S A LOT OF STUDENTS NOW
A DAYS, THAT GRADUATE WITH A
FOUR-YEAR DEGREE AND CAN'T FIND
WORK.
BUT WITH THIS TWO YEAR DEGREE
I'M ABLE TO COME AND GET A
CAREER FOR THE REST OF MY LIFE
AT A PREMIER MANUFACTURING
COMPANY.
>> Ifill: THOSE ARE JUST SOME OF
THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: THE TALIBAN
RELEASED A VIDEO TODAY SHOWING
THE HANDOVER OF P.O.W. ARMY
SERGEANT BOWE BERGDAHL LAST
SATURDAY.
IT CAME AS QUESTIONS CONTINUED
OVER HOW HE WAS CAPTURED IN THE
FIRST PLACE.
>> Woodruff: CLEAN SHAVEN AND
DRESSED IN TRADITIONAL AFGHAN
GARB, BERGDAHL IS FIRST SEEN
BLINKING RAPIDLY IN THE SUNLIGHT
AS HE AWAITS HIS TRANSFER.
AT ONE POINT, A TALIBAN FIGHTER
TELLS HIM, IN THE LOCAL
LANGUAGE, PASHTO, "DON'T COME
BACK TO AFGHANISTAN.
YOU WON'T MAKE IT OUT ALIVE NEXT
TIME."
SOME OF THE WORDS, MISSPELLED,
APPEAR ON THE SCREEN.
THEN, A U.S. MILITARY BLACKHAWK
HELICOPTER LANDS, AND THREE MEN
IN CIVILIAN CLOTHES QUICKLY
RETRIEVE BERGDAHL.
ONE PATS HIM DOWN, POSSIBLY FOR
EXPLOSIVES, AND HE GETS ABOARD,
ENDING NEARLY FIVE YEARS IN
CAPTIVITY.
A VOICEOVER SAYS THE TRANSFER
TOOK PLACE IN THE ALI SHER
DISTRICT OF KHOST PROVINCE, NEAR
THE BORDER WITH PAKISTAN.
MEANWHILE, U.S. DEFENSE
SECRETARY CHUCK HAGEL, IN
BELGIUM, SAID IT IS PREMATURE TO
ASSUME THAT BERGDAHL DESERTED IN
2009, AND THAT SEVERAL U.S.
SOLDIERS DIED IN THE INITIAL
SEARCH FOR HIM.
>> I DO NOT KNOW OF SPECIFIC
CIRCUMSTANCES OR DETAILS OF U.S.
SOLDIERS DYING AS A RESULT OF
EFFORTS TO FIND AND RESCUE
SERGEANT BERGDAHL.
IT'S NOT IN THE INTERESTS OF
ANYONE, AND CERTAINLY, I THINK,
A BIT UNFAIR TO SERGEANT
BERGDAHL'S FAMILY AND TO HIM, TO
PRESUME ANYTHING.
>> Woodruff: STILL, THE
CRITICISM CONTINUED.
THERE WAS THIS FROM REPUBLICAN
SENATOR JOHN MCCAIN OF ARIZONA,
A FORMER PRISONER OF WAR IN
VIETNAM.
>> WELL IT'S CERTAINLY, ALL OF
US ARE HAPPY FOR HIS FAMILY AND
FOR HIM THAT HE IS RETURNED TO
THE UNITED STATES.
I ALSO REMEMBER THAT WHEN I WAS
IN PRISON, OUR MOTTO WAS "HOME
WITH HONOR."
"HOME WITH HONOR" WAS OUR MOTTO.
>> Woodruff: THE WHITE HOUSE HAS
SAID IT ACTED QUICKLY TO FREE
BERGDAHL, WITHOUT TELLING
CONGRESS THAT THE DEAL WAS
IMMINENT, BECAUSE OF CONCERNS
ABOUT HIS HEALTH.
AND "THE WALL STREET JOURNAL"
REPORTED TODAY THAT SECRET
VIDEOS CHRONICLED HIS DECLINE.
FOR HIS PART, BERGDAHL SPENT A
FOURTH DAY UNDERGOING PHYSICAL
AND MENTAL ASSESSMENTS AT A U.S.
MILITARY HOSPITAL IN GERMANY.
>> Woodruff: IN ANOTHER
DEVELOPMENT, BERGDAHL'S HOMETOWN
OF HAILEY, IDAHO, CANCELED PLANS
FOR A RALLY CELEBRATING HIS
RELEASE.
THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR SAID THE
EXPECTED CROWD WOULD BE TOO
LARGE TO  MANAGE SAFELY.
>> Ifill: THE DEPARTMENT OF
VETERANS AFFAIRS HAS NOW
CONTACTED ALL 1,700 PATIENTS WHO
WERE LEFT OFF A MEDICAL WAIT
LIST IN PHOENIX, ARIZONA.
THE V.A. INSPECTOR GENERAL HAD
REPORTED THEY WERE OMITTED TO
COVER UP LONG WAIT TIMES FOR
CARE.
TODAY, ACTING V.A. SECRETARY
SLOAN GIBSON SAID OFFICIALS HAVE
BEGUN SCHEDULING APPOINTMENTS
FOR THOSE AND OTHER VETERANS.
>> WE ARE MOVING IMMEDIATELY TO
GET VETERAN'S OFF OF WAITLISTS
AND TO GET THEM INTO CLINICS AND
WE'RE TAKING ACTION TO FIX THE
SYSTEMIC PROBLEMS THAT ALLOWED
THESE UNACCEPTABLE WAITS TO
OCCUR.
>> Ifill: GIBSON TOOK OVER THE
DEPARTMENT LAST FRIDAY WHEN
SECRETARY ERIC SHINSEKI RESIGNED
UNDER FIRE.
HE SPOKE TODAY AT A WHITE HOUSE
EVENT ON HOMELESS VETS, HOSTED
BY FIRST LADY MICHELLE OBAMA.
SHE SAID THEIR NUMBERS HAVE
DROPPED BY 24% SINCE 2010, AND
SHE CALLED IT "A GOOD NEWS DAY."
>> Woodruff: IN SYRIA, PRESIDENT
BASHAR AL ASSAD WAS DECLARED THE
WINNER OF YESTERDAY'S
PRESIDENTIAL VOTE, WITH NEARLY
89% OF THE VOTE.
THE COUNTRY'S CONSTITUTIONAL
COURT REPORTED TURNOUT WAS 73%.
BUT THERE WAS NO VOTING IN MUCH
OF THE NORTH AND EAST, WHERE
REBELS ARE IN CONTROL.
>> Ifill: BACK IN THIS COUNTRY,
A SICK OUT BY TRANSIT WORKERS IN
SAN FRANCISCO APPEARED TO BE
EASING AFTER TWO DAYS.
LIGHT-RAIL TRAINS AND BUSES WERE
MOSTLY BACK ON SCHEDULE, AND
OFFICIALS HOPED TO RESUME
SERVICE ON THE CITY'S FAMED
CABLE CARS.
THE SICK-OUT BEGAN AFTER TRANSIT
WORKERS REJECTED A CONTRACT
PROPOSAL LAST FRIDAY.
>> Woodruff: ON WALL STREET
TODAY:
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED 15 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
16,737.
THE NASDAQ ROSE MORE THAN 17
POINTS TO CLOSE ABOVE 4,251.
AND THE S-AND-P 500 ADDED MORE
THAN THREE POINTS TO FINISH NEAR
1,928.
>> Ifill: THE LAST OF THE
ORIGINAL NAVAJO "CODE TALKERS,"
CHESTER NEZ, DIED TODAY IN NEW
MEXICO.
HE SUFFERED KIDNEY FAILURE.
NEZ WAS IN 10TH GRADE WHEN HE
LIED ABOUT HIS AGE AND ENLISTED
IN THE MARINE CORPS TO FIGHT IN
WORLD WAR TWO.
HE AND 28 OTHERS WERE RECRUITED
TO DEVELOP A CODE, BASED ON THE
UNWRITTEN NAVAJO LANGUAGE, THAT
STUMPED THE JAPANESE.
CHESTER NEZ WAS 93 YEARS OLD.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR:
THE PRESIDENT'S SHOW OF SUPPORT
FOR UKRAINE'S NEW LEADER;
WHY ONE FACTORY IS TURNING TO
APPRENTICESHIPS TO TRAIN YOUNG
WORKERS;
A LOOK AT CHINA 25 YEARS AFTER
THE TIANANMEN SQUARE CRACKDOWN;
PLUS: A TEA-PARTY CHALLENGER AND
A SIX-TERM SENATE STALWART HEAD
TO A PRIMARY RUNOFF.
>> Ifill: PRESIDENT OBAMA WAS IN
WARSAW TODAY, WHERE HE OBSERVED
THE ANNIVERSARY OF POLISH
DEMOCRACY, AND MET WITH
UKRAINE'S PRESIDENT ELECT
PETRO POROSHENKO.
THE EVENTS CAME AS ONE NATO ALLY
MEMBER IS ABOUT TO COMPLETE A
MILITARY DEAL WITH RUSSIA -
CAUSING MANY TO WONDER HOW CLOSE
THE U.S. AND IT'S EUROPEAN
ALLIES ARE IN THEIR APPROACH TO
DEALING WITH THAT COUNTRY'S
ACTIONS IN RECENT MONTHS.
>> Ifill: THE PRESIDENT PLEDGED
UNWAVERING SUPPORT FOR UKRAINE
AND IT'S INCOMING LEADER, AS
THEY BATTLE AN ECONOMIC SLIDE,
AND A PRO-RUSSIAN INSURGENCY.
>> WE HAD THE OPPORTUNITY TO
DISCUSS PRESIDENT ELECT
POROSHENKO'S PLANS FOR BRINGING
PEACE AND ORDER TO THE EAST THAT
IS STILL EXPERIENCING CONFLICT.
WE DISCUSSED HIS ECONOMIC PLANS
AND THE IMPORTANCE OF ROOTING
OUT CORRUPTION, INCREASING
TRANSPARENCY AND CREATING NEW
MODELS OF ECONOMIC GROWTH
POROSHENKO, A BILLIONAIRE
CHOCOLATE MAKER, WILL TAKE
OFFICE THIS WEEKEND.
BUT IT WAS PRESIDENT OBAMA WHO
BROUGHT THE SWEETENERS TODAY:
LOAN GUARANTEES AND $5 MILLION
DOLLARS IN ADDITIONAL NON-LETHAL
MILITARY AID, PLUS TRAINING FOR
TROOPS AND POLICE.
FOR HIS PART, POROSHENKO TALKED
OF PEACE, NOT WAR.
>> FROM THE VERY BEGINNING, FROM
THE VERY FIRST DAY OF
INAUGURATION WE ARE READY TO
PRESENT THE PLAN FOR PEACEFUL
REGULATION WITH SITUATION IN THE
EAST AND WE THINK THAT THE NEXT
SEVERAL DAYS WILL BE VERY
IMPORTANT, CRUCIAL FOR UKRAINIAN
HISTORY AND FOR THE UKRAINIAN
PERSPECTIVE.
>> Ifill: POROSHENKO LATER SAID
HIS "PLAN" WOULD INCLUDE
GRANTING AMNESTY FOR SOME
FIGHTERS AND DE-CENTRALIZING
POWER, A KEY DEMAND OF MANY IN
THE EAST.
AS HE SPOKE, HEAVY FIGHTING
CONTINUED IN HIS HOMELAND.
GOVERNMENT FORCES NEAR SLAVYANSK
CLAIMED 300 SEPARATISTS WERE
KILLED OVER THE LAST TWO DAYS.
AND REBELS CAPTURED THREE
GOVERNMENT BASES AROUND LUHANSK.
OFFICIALS SAID SIX OF THE
INSURGENTS AND THREE UKRAINIAN
SOLDIERS DIED IN THAT FIGHTING.
BACK IN WARSAW, PRESIDENT OBAMA
CITED POLAND AS AN EXAMPLE FOR
UKRAINE.
HE ADDRESSED THOUSANDS OF POLES
MARKING THE 25TH ANNIVERSARY OF
THEIR FIRST FREE ELECTIONS, EVEN
AS THE IRON CURTAIN WAS
CRUMBLING
THE PRESIDENT ALSO SAID N.A.T.O.
COUNTRIES MUST REAFFIRM
COMMITMENT TO A COMMON DEFENSE,
AS RUSSIA FLEXES ITS MUSCLES
ANEW.
>> THE DAYS OF EMPIRE AND
SPHERES OF INFLUENCE ARE OVER.
BIGGER NATIONS MUST NOT BE
ALLOWED TO BULLY OF SMALL OR
IMPOSE THEIR WILL AT THE BARREL
OF A GUN OR WITH MASKED MEN
TAKING OVER BUILDINGS AND THE
STROKE OF A PEN CAN NEVER
LEGITIMIZE THE THEFT OF A
NEIGHBOR'S LAND.
>> Ifill: IN BERLIN, GERMAN
CHANCELLOR ANGELA MERKEL
REINFORCED THAT MESSAGE, WITH AN
ADDITIONAL, SPECIFIC WARNING FOR
RUSSIA.
>> ( translated ): WITH RUSSIA
NOT SECURING IT'S BORDERS
ENOUGH.
LARGE NUMBERS OF FIGHTERS AND
AMMUNITION ARE REACHING THE
SOUTH EAST OF UKRAINE WHICH
FURTHER CONTRIBUTES TO THE
DESTABILIZATION OF ITS NEIGHBOR.
IF THIS DOESN'T HAPPEN, WE WON'T
SHRINK FROM IMPOSING FURTHER
SANCTIONS
>> Ifill: BUT RUSSIAN FOREIGN
MINISTER SERGEY LAVROV ANSWERED
IN MOSCOW, AND HE HAD A
DECIDEDLY DIFFERENT TAKE.
>> ( translated ): THE WESTERN
PARTNERS HAVE PROMOTED THEIR OWN
AGENDA, IGNORING THE INTERESTS
OF RUSSIA, EXPANDING N.A.T.O.
AND SEEKING TO MOVE A
GEOPOLITICAL AREA UNDER THEIR
CONTROL RIGHT TO THE RUSSIAN
BORDER.
>> Ifill: IN FACT, IT'S UNCLEAR
JUST HOW MUCH N.A.T.O. WILL DO.
FRANCE SAYS IT WILL FULFILL A
MULTI-BILLION DOLLAR CONTRACT
WITH RUSSIA TO SUPPLY IT WITH
AMPHIBIOUS CARRIER SHIPS.
AND WHILE MORE U.S. TROOPS HAVE
DEPLOYED TO POLAND, SLOVAKIA
JOINED THE CZECH REPUBLIC TODAY
IN RULING OUT ANY N.A.T.O. UNITS
ON ITS SOIL.
BOTH ARE MEMBERS OF THE
ALLIANCE, BUT RETAIN CLOSE TIES
TO RUSSIA.
PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS MOVED ON TO
BRUSSELS AND A MEETING OF THE G-
7 NATIONS, WHAT USED TO BE THE
G-8,  UNTIL RUSSIA WAS SUSPENDED
OVER ITS INVASION AND ANNEXATION
OF THE UKRAINIAN REGION OF
CRIMEA.
SO, IS PUTIN ISOLATED?
IS EUROPE UNITED?
AND HOW WELL IS PRESIDENT OBAMA
WALKING THAT TIGHTROPE?
FOR MORE ON THAT, WE TURN TO:
DAVID KRAMER, THE PRESIDENT OF
FREEDOM HOUSE. AN ORGANIZATION
THAT MONITORS DEMOCRACY
MOVEMENTS AROUND THE WORLD.
AND HEATHER CONLEY, DIRECTOR OF
THE EUROPE PROGRAM AT THE CENTER
FOR STRATEGIC AND INTERNATIONAL
STUDIES.
SO HOVERING OVER ALL OF THIS IS
VLADIMIR PUTIN, AND WHETHER HE'S
PRESENT OR ABSENT, DOES IT
MATTER?
DOES IT CAST A CLOUD, HEATHER
CONLEY?
>> IT DOES.
IN FACT, THIS TRIP FOR THE
PRESIDENT, JUST LIKE HIS TRIP TO
EUROPE IN MARCH, HAS BEEN
SHADOWED BY PUTIN AND WHAT HE'S
DONE IN UKRAINE, AND THE END OF
THE TRIP IN NORMANDY WHERE
PRESIDENT PUTIN WILL BE MEETING
WITH GERMAN CHANCELLOR MERKEL
AND DAVID CAMERON, SEEMS LIKE
THE ISOLATION POLICY HAS COME TO
AN END AND LOOKS AS IF EUROPEAN
LEADERS ARE UNWILLING TO TAKE
MORE DIFFICULT STEPS LIKE
TOUGHER SANCTIONS EVEN THOUGH
THEY'RE TALKING TOUGH, TAKING
THAT NEXT STEP OF HARMING
EUROPEAN COMPANIES AND EUROPEAN
BUSINESS JUST SEEMS LIKE A
STRETCH TOO FAR, SO THE
PRESIDENT HAS AN ENORMOUS TASK
ON HIS HANDS IN BRUSSELS AT THE
G7 AND IN NORMANDY TO DEEP
EUROPEAN SOLIDARITY AGAINST
RUSSIAN ACTIONS IN UKRAINE
TOGETHER IS GOING TO BE VERY
DIFFICULT.
>> Ifill: DAVID KRAMER, HOW DO
YOU SEE IT?
>> PUTIN IS IN THE HEADLINES.
LAST WEEK, IN THE PRESIDENT'S
WEST POINT SPEECH, HE WAS
TALKING ABOUT THE U.S. LED IN
ISOLATING RUSSIA, AND AS HEATHER
SAID, THAT ISOLATION HAS COME TO
AN END.
I THINK IT HAS TO BE POINTED TO
THE FRENCH LEADERSHIP BY
INVITING PUTIN TO PARTICIPATE IN
THE NORMANDY EXERCISES.
TO HAVE RUSSIAN FORCES IN
FRANCE, TO TRAIN TO USE THE
AMPHIBIOUS SHIPS FRANCE WILL
SELL AND TO CONTINUE TO SAY THEY
ARE GOING TO SELL THEM, ALSO
DOESN'T HELP FOR THE PRESIDENT
OF THE UNITED STATES TO TALK
ABOUT IF RUSSIA SHOWS MORE
RESPONSIBLE BEHAVIOR WE MIGHT
RESTORE TRUST.
RUSSIA HAS ANNEXED CRIMEA, HAS
FORCES IN UKRAINE, WE'R WE'RE SG
AN ESCALATION AND THERE NEED TO
BE CONSEQUENCE FORCE THAT.
>> Ifill: LET'S TALK ABOUT
WHAT OUR ALLIES ARE DOING AND
WHETHER WE'RE SPEAKING WITH ONE
VOICE.
THE ADMINISTRATION OFFICIAL
TRAVELING WITH THE PRESS TODAY
BRIEFED ON THIS AND SAID
SOMETHING LIKE, WELL, YOU KNOW,
WE ALL HAVE DIFFERENT THINGS WE
HAVE TO DO TO DEAL WITH RUSSIA.
WE STILL HAVE AMERICAN COMPANIES
DOING BUSINESS WITH RUSSIA, SO
IT'S NOT A COMPLETE SHUT-OFF AND
FRANCE NEEDS TO DO WHAT IT NEEDS
TO DO, GERMANY NEEDS TO DO WHAT
IT NEEDS TO DO AND WE'LL ALL
JUST DO OUR PART.
YOU'RE SAYING THAT'S NOT ENOUGH?
>> I THINK THIS IS THE TIME FOR
U.S. LEADERSHIP.
WE SHOULD FORGET TRYING TO HAVE
U.S. AND E.U. STEPS TOGETHER.
THEY ARE NOT GOING TO HAPPEN.
I WOULD LIKE TO SEE THE U.S.
MOVE FORWARD WITH MORE SANCTIONS
AGAINST RUSSIA.
THE E.U. IS NOT GOING TO DO IT.
THEY ARE BADLY DIVIDED AS WE
TALKED ABOUT GERMANY AND FRANCE.
EASTERN AND CENTRAL EUROPE IS
BADLY DIVIDED OVER THE ISSUES.
THE U.S. SHOULD LEAD, IT'S
EASIER FOR THE U.S. TO DO IT AND
IT SHOULD.
>> Ifill: A COUPLE OF WEEKS
AGO WHEN ANGELA MERKEL WAS HERE
AND THEY CAME OUT AND DREW A NEW
LINE IN THE SAND.
THEY SAID IT WAS NO LONGER ABOUT
WHETHER TO ANNEX FURTHER
TERRITORY THAT WOULD BRING ON
THE SECTORAL SANCTIONS, IT'S NOW
WHETHER THEY WILL HOLD THE
TROOPS BACK FROM THE BORDER IN
TIME FOR THE ELECTIONS, AND BY
ALL INDICATIONS THEY DID.
WHY ISN'T THIS JUST AN OUTCOME
OF THAT KIND OF LINE IN THE
SAND?
>> PART OF THE STRATEGY WAS TO
GET TO THE MAY 5 UKRAINIAN
ELECTION.
>> Ifill: RIGHT.
N SOME WAYS WE HAVE BEEN TOO
TRANSPARENT SIGNALING TO PUTIN
WHAT EXACTLY WE EXPECT.
SO WE WANTED HIM TO ACKNOWLEDGE
AND RECOGNIZE AND RESPECT THE
LEGITIMACY OF PORT-AU-PRINCE'S
ELECTION.
WE WANTED HIM TO REMOVE RUSSIAN
TROOPS FROM THE UKRAINIAN BORDER
AND TO STOP DESTABILIZING THE
SITUATION.
SO PRESIDENT PUTIN KNOWS WHAT HE
NEEDS TO DO JUST ENOUGH TO KEEP
THIS EUROPE DEEPLY DIVIDED, AS
DAVID SAID.
WE'RE SIGNALING, ALREADY, ABOUT
WHERE OUR SANCTION'S THRESHOLD
IS FOR THE NEXT SECTION.
WE HAVE TO STOP DOING THAT.
WE KNOW THAT RUSSIAN WEAPONS,
RUSSIAN TROOPS ARE GOING ACROSS
THE BORDER, THIS IS HOW THESE
PRO RUSSIAN SEPARATISTS ARE SO
INCREDIBLY ARMED AND LED BY
RUSSIANS.
THEY'RE NOT TAKING ANY STEPS.
IN SOME WAYS UKRAINE IS MORE
UNSTABLE THAN IT WAS BEFORE
MAY 25.
WE HAVEN'T ACHIEVED THOSE
OBJECTIVES --
>> Ifill: WHICH IS OPPOSITE OF
WHAT THE ADMINISTRATION SAYS.
I TALKED TO JOHN KERRY LAST WEEK
AND HE SAID WE SUCCEEDED IN
STOPPING RUSSIA STEPPING
FORWARD.
>> I SEE IT'S THE WEST THAT
WANTS TO DEESCALATE THIS BECAUSE
IT'S GOING TO TAKE AN ENORMOUS
AMOUNT OF ATTENTION BY THE
EUROPEAN LEADERS AND THE UNITED
STATES TO ENGAGE IN THIS.
THIS WILL TAKE YEARS OF
INSTABILITY AND REQUIRE NATO TO
HAVE A MUCH MORE ROBUST
PRESIDENT.
THAT'S WHY THE PRESIDENT
ANNOUNCED YESTERDAY IN WARSAW A
BILLION DOLLARS FOR A
REASSURANCE INITIATIVE.
WE ARE GOING TO BE IN THIS
REGION.
>> Ifill: IS THAT GOOD NEWS?
T IS GOOD NEWS BECAUSE WE
NEED U.S. LEADERSHIP IN EUROPE,
ABSOLUTELY.
UNFORTUNATELY, FOR MANY LEADERS
THAT HAVE STRONG DOMESTIC
CHALLENGES, IN THE EUROPEAN
PARLIAMENT THERE'S FRAGILITY, WE
HAVE THINGS TO FOCUS ON, ASIA
AND ELSEWHERE.
I HOPE WE'RE IN IT FOR THE LONG
HAUL BECAUSE THE INSTABILITY IS
DEEPENING.
>> Ifill: THE PRESIDENT IS
GOING TO BE IN THE SAME ROOM AS
VLADIMIR PUTIN TWICE TOMORROW AT
THE MEETING.
IS THAT SIGNIFICANT?
THEY'RE NOT TELLING US THEY'RE
GOING TO SPEAK.
>> THERE'S NO SCHEDULED MEETING
BETWEEN THE TWO, I EXPECT, SINCE
IT'S NOT A HUGE GATHERING, BUT
THEY WILL HAVE SOME EXCHANGE OF
A SORT.
PUTIN DENIED RUSSIA IS PLAYING A
ROLE IN EASTERN UKRAINE.
YOU HAD THE TOP NATO MILITARY
COMMANDER SAYING RUSSIA IS
CONTINUING TO DESTABILIZE
UKRAINE, RUSSIAN FORCES AND BACK
FORCES ARE THERE, CONTRADICTING
WHAT SECRETARY KERRY TOLD YOU
LAST YEAR, THE NATO MILITARY
COMMANDER THINKS RUSSIA
CONTINUES TO DESTABILIZE
UKRAINE.
I DON'T KNOW WHAT QUITE WE'LL
TALK ABOUT WITH PRESIDENT PUTIN,
HE CONTINUES TO VIOLATE
INTERSECTIONED NORMS AND
AGREEMENTS, AGREEMENTS AND
UKRAINE'S INTEGRITY AND
SOVEREIGNTY.
>> Ifill: MOSCOW'S NOT HAPPY
ABOUT THE MONEY SPENT FOR THE
U.S. MILITARY ALLIANCE.
>> NATO ENLARGEMENT IS NOT A
THREAT TO RUSSIA AND YET RUSSIA
IN ITS MILITARY DOCTRINE IN 2010
CITED NATO ENLARGEMENT AS THE
GREATEST DANGER TO RUSSIA WHICH
IS NONSENSE.
>> MAKE NO MISTAKE, RUSSIA WILL
RESPOND TO NATO AS IT CONTINUES
TO STRENGTHEN IT'S EASTERN
BORDER.
IT HAS TO.
ARTICLE 5 OBLIGATIONS, AN ATTACK
AGAINST ONE IS AN ATTACK AGAINST
ALL.
WE NEED TO PROVIDE ASSURANCE TO
THE BALL TICK STATES, POLAND AND
OTHERS THAT NATO IS REAL AND
WILL RESPOND WHEN AN ALLY IS
THREATENED.
BUT RUSSIA WILL RESPOND, SO
RUSSIA IS GOICTS IN ANTICIPATION
BUILD THE FORCES.
SO, AGAIN, AS I MENTIONED, THE
TENSION, THE INSTABILITY, IT'S
NOT DEESCALATING.
WE'RE GOING TO BE IN THIS PERIOD
FOR QUITE SOME TIME AND I HOPE
THE WHITE HOUSE IS FULLY
PREPARED FOR THIS.
THE PRESIDENT'S SPEECH IN WARSAW
TODAY WAS VERY STRONG AND
POWERFUL.
NOW WE NEED TO SEE THE
FOLLOW-UP, THE IMPLEMENTATION
AND THE POLICY FOCUS TO FULFILL
THE SPEECH.
>> Ifill: HEATHER CONLEY,
CENTER FOR STRATEGIC
INTERNATIONAL STUDIES AND DAVID
KRAMER OF FREEDOM HOUSE.
THANK YOU BOTH VERY MUCH.
>> THANKS.
>> Woodruff: ON FRIDAY, WE'RE
GOING TO GET THE LATEST SNAPSHOT
FROM THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
ABOUT THE STATE OF THE JOB
MARKET.
A SEPARATE PAYROLL REPORT ISSUED
TODAY FOUND PRIVATE COMPANIES
CREATED ALMOST 180,000 JOBS IN
MAY, FEWER THAN IN APRIL.
THE UNEMPLOYMENT RATE REMAINS
VERY HIGH FOR THOSE UNDER THE
AGE OF 25: IT'S IN THE DOUBLE
DIGITS AND AT HIGHER RATES FOR
TEENS WITHOUT DEGREES.
THE NEWSHOUR'S ECONOMICS
CORRESPONDENT, PAUL SOLMAN, HAS
A REPORT ABOUT ONE PROGRAM FROM
AN AUTO MANUFACTURER THAT OFFERS
POSSIBILITIES FOR SOME OF THOSE
WORKERS.
IT'S PART OF HIS REPORTING ON
"MAKING SENSE OF FINANCIAL
NEWS."
>> Reporter: THE B.M.W. FACTORY
IN SPARTANBURG, SOUTH CAROLINA,
B.M.W.'S ONLY U.S. AUTO PLANT.
BUILT 20 YEARS AGO, MAINLY FOR
ACCESS TO THE AMERICAN MARKET,
IT'S NOW THE SOLE PRODUCTION
FACILITY FOR THEIR POPULAR X-
MODEL LINE OF LUXURY CROSSOVER
SUV's, 1,200 VEHICLES A DAY.
BUT B.M.W.'s, AND THE OCCASIONAL
TEUTONIC EXECUTIVE, AREN'T THE
ONLY GERMAN IMPORTS AROUND HERE.
THERE'S ALSO APPRENTICESHIPS.
>> I ACTUALLY GREW UP IN GERMANY
IN A LITTLE VILLAGE AND MY DADDY
AND MY MOM WERE OF A BLUE COLLAR
BACKGROUND, SO FOR THEM COLLEGE
WAS NOT SOMETHING THAT THEY
REALLY ENVISIONED FOR ME.
>> Reporter: AND SO WERNER
EIKENBUSCH, B.M.W.'S HEAD OF
WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT FOR THE
AMERICAS, LEFT HIGH SCHOOL IN
TENTH GRADE FOR AN
APPRENTICESHIP, COMBINING ON-
THE-JOB TRAINING WITH VOCATIONAL
SCHOOL.
>> THIS GERMAN DUAL SYSTEM HAS A
LONG HISTORY IN EUROPE.
IT GOES BACK HUNDREDS OF YEARS,
SO IT'S REALLY VERY MUCH
EMBEDDED AND IT IS ACTUALLY A
RECOGNIZED, YOU COULD CALL IT
EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY, THAT, FOR
WHATEVER REASON, DID NOT MAKE IT
OVER INTO THE U.S.
>> Reporter: EIKENBUSCH LATER
BECAME AN ENGINEER, ROSE THROUGH
B.M.W.'S RANKS.
AND A FEW YEARS AGO, UNABLE TO
FIND ENOUGH SKILLED WORKERS TO
FILL JOBS IN THE SPARTANBURG
PLANT, HE HELPED SET UP AN
APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM MODELED
ON THE ONES BACK HOME.
AT FIRST, IT WAS FAR FROM AN
EASY SELL.
FOR ONE THING, GERMAN
APPRENTICESHIPS ARE ASSOCIATED
WITH UNIONS, A NO-NO IN THIS
FAMOUSLY "RIGHT TO WORK" STATE.
FOR THE RECORD, THE B.M.W. PLANT
IS NOT UNIONIZED.
FOR ANOTHER THING...
>> THERE'S A LITTLE BIT OF A
STIGMA WITH GOING INTO A
MANUFACTURING TYPE CAREER.
>> Reporter: RYAN CHILDERS, A
FORMER PRODUCTION WORKER
HIMSELF, NOW OVERSEES THE
APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM.
WHERE DOES THIS STIGMA COME
FROM, DO YOU THINK?
>> MAYBE 30 YEARS AGO; THE
TEXTILE INDUSTRY, OR INDUSTRIES
OF THAT NATURE, ARE PRETTY DARK
ENVIRONMENT TO WORK IN, DIRTY
ENVIRONMENT.
>> Reporter: UNLIKE MODERN AUTO
PLANTS.
SO CHILDERS HIT THE RECRUITING
ROAD, AND STILL DOES, NEARLY
EVERY WEEK, PITCHING THE PROGRAM
AT COMMUNITY COLLEGES AND HIGH
SCHOOLS.
AT GREENVILLE HIGH SCHOOL'S
CAREER DAY, THE MAIN COMPETITION
WAS THE MILITARY, WALMART, AND A
SMALL LOCAL CHAIN OF FUNERAL
HOMES.
THE B.M.W. PROGRAM LOOKED PRETTY
GOOD TO THESE SENIORS:
PART-TIME WORK WHILE GETTING AN
ALL-EXPENSES PAID ASSOCIATES
DEGREE AT ONE OF THREE AREA
TECHNICAL COLLEGES, WITH THE
NEAR GUARANTEE OF A JOB AND
FURTHER EDUCATION DOWN THE ROAD.
>> I REALLY GOT IN TOUCH WITH
B.M.W. BECAUSE I LIKE THE
PROGRAM THEY HAVE.
>> YOU DON'T GET TOO MANY JOBS
START ABOUT $12.
THAT'S  GREAT PAY FOR KIDS OUR
AGE.
>> Reporter: IT WAS A SIMILAR
PITCH THAT GOT AMANDA ECHOLS'
ATTENTION WHILE ATTENDING A
RADIOLOGY PROGRAM.
>> THEY PAY FOR YOUR COLLEGE,
FIRST OF ALL, SO YOU WILL GET A
DEGREE WHEN YOU'RE DONE.
YOU MAKE GOOD MONEY WHILE GOING
TO COLLEGE, I JUST COULD NOT SEE
ANYBODY TURNING IT DOWN REALLY.
>> Reporter: BUT MOST PEOPLE
WOULD TURN IT DOWN.
>> I DON'T THINK THEY REALLY
UNDERSTAND WHAT IT IS.
WHEN THEY HEAR 'MANUFACTURING'
THEY THINK DIRTY, SWEATY, NASTY.
I MEAN, I KEEP MY HANDS CLEAN
ALL DAY LONG.
THEY DON'T GET DIRTY AT ALL.
>> Reporter: IT'S THE ROBOTS
THAT GET DIRTY HERE.
1,400 OF THEM RULE THE ROOST,
MAKING MUCH OF THE PLANT SEEM ON
AUTOMATIC PILOT.
BUT THERE ARE ALSO 8,000 JOBS
FOR HUMANS, STARTING AT $15 AN
HOUR, PLUS BENEFITS.
>> YOU GET PAID PRETTY GOOD TO
BE WORKING ON THE LINE HERE.
>> Reporter: APPRENTICE BRIAN
ORDONEZ HOPES TO MAKE ROBOTICS
HIS CAREER, THINKS IT'S NOT SO
MUCH THREAT AS OPPORTUNITY.
>> YOU NEED A PERSON TO TELL
THAT ROBOT WHAT TO DO.
AND YOU NEED THAT PERSON TO FIX
IT.
>> Reporter: WELL, MAYBE YOU
WILL HAVE ROBOTS THAT FIX THE
OTHER ROBOTS.
>> WHAT ROBOT ARE YOU GOING TO
HAVE TO FIX THAT ROBOT THAT'S
FIXING THE OTHER ROBOTS?
YOU NEED PEOPLE; YOU NEED PEOPLE
TO FIX IT.
>> Reporter: WELL, FOR THE NEXT
FEW YEARS, ANYWAY.
AND SINCE EVEN THE ROBOTS STILL
NEED TO WEAR PROTECTIVE SLEEVES
IN THE PAINT SHOP, I SUITED UP.
>> YOU LOOK JUST STUNNING.
>> Reporter: THANK YOU, I'VE
ALWAYS WANTED A WHITE SUIT.
>> Reporter: DUSTIN REID MAY BE
SARTORIALLY INDISCRIMINATE, BUT
HE KNOWS FROM DIRTY JOBS.
AFTER HIGH SCHOOL AND THE
MARINES, HE SPENT TWO YEARS
WORKING IN A SCRAP-YARD, THEN
FOUR AS A SUPERVISOR IN A
POULTRY PROCESSING PLANT HE'D
JUST AS SOON FORGET.
>> MANUFACTURING'S REALLY,
REALLY GROWING RIGHT NOW.
>> Reporter: BUT ISN'T THE
AMERICAN DREAM TO GET A FOUR-
YEAR COLLEGE DEGREE AND THEN GET
A GOOD JOB?
>> THERE'S A LOT OF THE STUDENTS
NOWADAYS THAT GRADUATE WITH A
FOUR-YEAR DEGREE AND CAN'T FIND
WORK.
BUT WITH THIS TWO-YEAR DEGREE,
I'M ABLE TO COME AND GET A
CAREER FOR THE REST OF MY LIFE
AT A PREMIER MANUFACTURING
COMPANY.
PRETTY MUCH SPEAKS FOR ITSELF.
>> Reporter: ECONOMIST BOB
LERMAN, WHO TAGGED ALONG WITH US
IN SOUTH CAROLINA, HAS BEEN
STUDYING YOUTH UNEMPLOYMENT FOR
DECADES.
RIGHT NOW, EVEN COLLEGE GRADS
UNDER AGE 25 HAVE A 50% CHANCE
OF BEING UN- OR UNDER-EMPLOYED,
AND THE LONG-TERM PROSPECTS ARE
MUCH WORSE FOR THE ONE-THIRD OF
YOUNG AMERICANS WITHOUT ANY
COLLEGE AT ALL.
APPRENTICESHIPS, LERMAN THINKS,
PROVIDE A RAY OF HOPE.
>> IT'S THE MOST PROMISING THING
I'VE SEEN FOR THE BROAD PROBLEM
OF YOUTH THAT ARE NOT SUCCEEDING
IN A FOUR-YEAR COLLEGE.
WE TALK ALL THE TIME ABOUT
PEOPLE WITHOUT JOBS AND JOBS
WITHOUT PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: BRAD NEESE RUNS
APPRENTICESHIP CAROLINA, A STATE
FUNDED OFFICE, FOUNDED IN 2007,
THAT HELPS EMPLOYERS SET UP
REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIP
PROGRAMS.
TO SWEETEN THE POT, SOUTH
CAROLINA OFFERS A $1,000 PER
YEAR TAX CREDIT PER APPRENTICE.
BUT THE COMPANIES BEAR MOST OF
THE EDUCATIONAL AND TRAINING
COSTS, WHICH CAN RUN WELL OVER
$50,000 A HEAD.
>> WE'VE BUILT THIS THING FROM
777 APPRENTICES TO OVER 10,000
NOW.
WHEN WE STARTED IT, WE ONLY HAD
90 COMPANIES.
WE NOW HAVE 650 TODAY.
THE REASON WE'RE GROWING IS
BECAUSE THE BUSINESSES ARE
SAYING: WE NEED A PIPELINE OF
TALENT.
WE NEED TO GROW OUR OWN.
WE CAN NO LONGER FIND TALENT IN
THE OPEN MARKET.
>> Reporter: EVEN AS U.S.
UNEMPLOYMENT HAS REMAINED
STUBBORNLY HIGH, EMPLOYERS,
ESPECIALLY IN MANUFACTURING,
COMPLAIN THEY CAN'T FIND ENOUGH
QUALIFIED WORKERS.
SO APPRENTICESHIP SOUTH CAROLINA
HELPS TAILOR THE STATE TECHNICAL
COLLEGE CURRICULUM TO EACH
EMPLOYER'S NEEDS, LIKE THIS
MECHATRONICS PROGRAM AT
GREENVILLE TECH, USED BY BMW AND
OTHERS.
DO YOU WORRY AT ALL THAT WITH
INDUSTRY SO SPECIFICALLY RUNNING
THE SHOW, IT'S SOMEHOW
COMPROMISING THE EDUCATIONAL
MISSION?
>> SO WHAT IF THEY'RE NOT
READING SHAKESPEARE?
THESE GUYS WANT TO WORK WITH
THEIR HANDS, SO THEY WANT TO GET
INTO THE THEORETICAL KNOWLEDGE,
NOT OF THE IAMBIC PENTAMETER,
THEY WANT TO GET INTO THE
THEORETICAL KNOWLEDGE OF OHM'S
LAW.
I'M MORE OF A HANDS ON PERSON,
NOT SITTING IN THE DESK, WRITING
AND LOOKING AT A COMPUTER
SCREEN.
>> Reporter: BRANDON RICHARDS IS
AN APPRENTICE AT UNITED TOOL AND
MOLD IN EASLEY, WHICH SUPPLIES
BMW AND OTHER GERMAN COMPANIES,
HAS MODELED IT'S NEW
APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM ON
THEIRS.
>> IT STARTS OUT WITH A PAID
ASSOCIATES DEGREE AND WE ALSO
PAY FOR THEIR TIME WHEN THEY SIT
IN THE CLASS.
IF THEIR HOURLY RATE AT THE SHOP
IS $10 AN HOUR, THEN THEY'RE
GOING TO MAKE THAT $10 AN HOUR
WHILE THEY'RE SITTING IN SCHOOL.
>> Reporter: A THIRD GENERATION
TOOL AND DIE MAKER, PRODUCTION
MANAGER JEROMY ARNETT IS A TRUE
BELIEVER IN APPRENTICESHIPS.
WHEN HE STARTED HERE 16 YEARS
AGO.
>> I DIDN'T KNOW THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN A DRILL AND A REAMER AND
AN END MILL.
I SEE MYSELF IN THOSE YOUNG KIDS
AND ALL THEY WANT IS AN
OPPORTUNITY.
BUT DON'T HAVE THE SKILL SETS.
>> Reporter: BUT WHY, IF
APPRENTICESHIPS ARE BOOMING IN
THE PALMETTO STATE, ARE THEY
LAGGING EVERYWHERE ELSE, DOWN
40% NATIONWIDE IN THE LAST FIVE
YEARS?
>> I THINK A LOT OF IT HAS TO DO
WITH REALLY THE MINDSET.
ARE YOU WILLING TO THINK LONG
TERM AND INVEST IN THE FRONT
END, BECAUSE YOU'RE GOING TO
HAVE THE RETURN ON THE
INVESTMENT IN THE CAREER OF A
SUCCESSFUL AND PRODUCTIVE
EMPLOYEE.
IT'S JUST YOU HAVE AN UP-FRONT
COST.
>> Reporter: BOB LERMAN SUGGESTS
ANOTHER REASON.
>> UNLESS YOU ALLOW EVERYBODY TO
DO THE SAME THING.
>> Reporter: GO TO COLLEGE FOR
FOUR YEARS.
>> GO TO COLLEGE, YOU ARE
REDUCING EQUALITY AND PEOPLE ARE
VERY UNCOMFORTABLE SAYING THAT
MY CHILD WILL GO TO COLLEGE, BUT
YOUR CHILD MIGHT NOT GO TO
COLLEGE.
AND THEN THERE ARE PEOPLE WHO
DON'T EVEN START COLLEGE.
AND WHAT ARE THEIR OPTIONS?
THEY'RE NOT VERY GOOD.
>> Reporter: SO PERHAPS
APPRENTICESHIP SHOULD BE ONE OF
THEM.
>> Woodruff: PAUL HAS MORE WITH
B.M.W.'S WERNER EIKENBUSH, WHO
GIVES HIS UNIQUE PERSPECTIVE ON
MANAGEMENT STYLES AS A GERMAN
WORKING IN THE U.S.
THAT'S ON "MAKING SENSE."
>> Ifill: 25 YEARS AGO, PRO-
DEMOCRACY PROTESTERS IN
BEIJING'S TIANANMEN SQUARE WERE
MASSACRED IN A GOVERNMENT
CRACKDOWN THAT CAPTURED THE
WORLD'S ATTENTION.
BUT INSIDE CHINA ITSELF, THE THE
INCIDENT GARNERED LITTLE
ATTENTION.
AND AS JONATHAN RUGMAN OF
INDEPENDENT TELEVISION NEWS
REPORTS, THAT HASN'T CHANGED.
>> Reporter: IT IS AN EVENT THE
CHINESE OFFICIALLY STILL CALL A
COUNTER REVOLUTIONARY RIOT.
HUNDREDS IF NOT THOUSANDS SHOT
OR BAYONETED OR CRUSHED BY THE
PEOPLE'S LIBERATION ARMY.
AND NO IMAGE OF THAT PRO-
DEMOCRACY MOVEMENT IS AS ICONIC
AS THIS.
A DEFIANT LONE PROTESTER, NEVER
IDENTIFIED, HIS FATE STILL
UNKNOWN AFTER 25 YEARS.
THESE DAYS TIANAMNMEN SQUARE IS
THE CENTER OF THE WORLD'S
BIGGEST CONSUMER MARKET.
WHAT HAPPENED HERE PRETTY MUCH
AIRBRUSHED FROM HISTORY.
THE SCANDAL OF  CORRUPTION STILL
THREATENS CHINA'S ONE PARTY
STATE BUT NOT MUCH ELSE DOES.
EVEN THE CEMETERIES WHERE THE
TIANANMEN DEAD LIE WERE BLOCKED
BY POLICE TODAY.
TRY SEARCHING THE MASSACRE DATE
ONLINE AND ACCESS TO INFORMATION
IS DENIED.
IN THIS SURVEILLANCE SOCIETY
THOSE WHO DO REMEMBER KNOW IT IS
SAFER TO FORGET.
>> ( translated ): MAKING A FUSS
ABOUT IT FOR SUCH A LONG TIME IS
MEANINGLESS.
BECAUSE CHINA'S SYSTEM IS
DIFFERENT FROM THE WEST.
THE POPULATION IS HUGE, 1.4
BILLION.
SO IF YOU WANT TO GOVERN IT
WELL, IT IS NOT EASY.
>> Reporter: HU JIA WITNESSED
TIANANMEN AS A TEENAGER.
NOW THIS NOTORIOUS POLITICAL
ACTIVIST IS UNDER HOUSE ARREST
AGAIN, SENDING CHANNEL 4 NEWS
THIS VIDEO DESPITE THE
PLAINCLOTHES POLICEMAN DOZING
OUTSIDE HIS DOOR.
AND THOUGH HE CAN'T MARK THIS
ANNIVERSARY IN THE SQUARE
HIMSELF, HE BELIEVES CHANGE WILL
COME.
>> ( translated ): WE HAVE TO GO
THROUGH WHAT HAPPENED IN THE
SQUARE.
LIKE WHAT HAPPENED IN THE SOVIET
UNION.
LIKE THE ARAB SPRING.
THE COMMUNIST PARTY IS REALLY
WORRIED.
THEY HAVE ARRESTED A LOT OF
PEOPLE AND THEY ARE UNDER AN
INCREDIBLE AMOUNT OF PRESSURE.
>> Reporter: IN HONG KONG
THOUGH, FREEDOM STILL MANAGES TO
FLOWER.
TONIGHT'S ANNUAL VIGIL WAS
ATTENDED BY A HUNDRED THOUSAND
OR MORE.
MAINLAND CHINESE FLOCKING TO THE
ONLY CITY WHERE A DEMONSTRATION
LIKE THIS WOULD BE ALLOWED.
THERE'S BEEN NO OFFICIAL ENQUIRY
INTO WHAT HAPPENED 25 YEARS AGO.
BUT HERE AT LEAST THE FLAME OF
REMEMBRANCE BURNS BRIGHTLY.
>> Ifill: JEFFREY BROWN PICKS UP
THE STORY FROM THERE.
>> Brown: SO HOW ARE THE EVENTS
OF 25 YEARS AGO VIEWED TODAY IN
CHINA?
AND HOW HAVE THOSE EVENTS HELPED
SHAPE TODAY'S CHINA?
FOR THAT WE TURN TO LOUISA LIM,
WHO'S COVERED CHINA FOR THE LAST
DECADE, FIRST FOR THE B.B.C.
AND NOW FOR N.P.R.
SHE'S THE AUTHOR OF "THE
PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF AMNESIA:
TIANANMEN REVISITED."
AND CHOW CHUNG IS AN ADJUNCT
PROFESSOR AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
CALIFORNIA AT BERKELEY.
HE'S THE FOUNDER AND EDITOR-IN-
CHIEF OF CHINA DIGITAL TIMES, A
BILINGUAL CHINA NEWS WEBSITE.
LOUISA LIM, LET ME START WITH
YOU.
YOU USED THE WORD AMNESIA.
YOU HAVE A TELLING STORY IN YOUR
BOOK ABOUT TAKING AN IMAGE, THAT
FAMOUS PHOTO WE SAW OF THE MAN
STANDING IN FRONT OF THE TANK,
AND SHOWING IT TO A BUNCH OF
UNIVERSITY STUDENTS, MOST OF
THEM WHO DIDN'T KNOW WHAT IT
WAS.
>> THAT'S RIGHT, I TOOK THAT
PICTURE AND I TOOK IT AROUND
FOUR BEIJING UNIVERSITIES, THOSE
THAT HAVE BEEN MOST INSTRUMENTAL
IN THE PROTESTS IN 1989, AND I
SHOWED IT TO 100 STUDENTS, AND I
WAS REALLY SURPRISED AT THE
LEVEL OF IGNORANCE.
MOST OF THEM LOOKED AT IT WITH
COMPLETELY BLANK FACES, NO
FLICKER OF RECOGNITION
WHATSOEVER.
PEOPLE ASKED QUESTIONS LIKE IS
IT KOSOVO, SOUTH KOREA?
ONE SAID, LOOKS LIKE TIANANMEN
SQUARE BUT IT CAN'T BE.
OUT OF 100 STUDENTS, ONLY 15
RECOGNIZED THE IMAGE.
THAT SHOWS THE CHINESE
GOVERNMENT ENFORCING AMNESIA ON
SO MANY YOUNG PEOPLE.
>> Brown: HOW IMPORTANT IS THE
MEMORY FOR DISSIDENTS IN CHINA
AND HOW STRONG IS THAT DISSIDENT
MOVEMENT TODAY?
>> I WOULD EVEN SAY THE
TIANANMEN GENERATION IS SIMPLY
USING THE WORD DISSIDENTS.
25 YEARS AGO, THAT WAS AN ENTIRE
GENERATION OF CHINESE, EVEN JUST
COLLEGE STUDENTS ALONE, IT'S
NATIONWIDE PARTICIPATING IN THE
PRO-DEMOCRACY DEMONSTRATION, AND
BEIJING, THERE'S MILLIONS AND
MILLIONS OF CITIZENS, TOO, AND
NATIONWIDE.
SO ALL OF THESE PEOPLE, MOST OF
US, ARE ALIVE, AND HAVE THE REAL
REMEMBRANCE.
BUT IT'S BEEN BRUTALLY
SUPPRESSED, AND THEN 25 YEARS
LATER, THIS TRAUMA AND THIS
MEMORY, WHERE DOES IT EXACTLY
GO?
IT'S A QUESTION OF -- TO ANSWER
MANY QUESTIONS -- IT'S A
QUESTION THAT NEEDS TO BE
ANSWERED, BUT IT'S ALSO THE
ANSWER WILL TELL US WHERE CHINA
IS GOING TO GO TOMORROW.
LET'S SAY LOUISA'S QUESTION,
MANY YOUNG GENERATIONS DON'T
KNOW ABOUT TIANANMEN SQUARE.
THAT IS QUITE TRUE IF YOU GO TO
CHINA AND VISIT A LOT OF PEOPLE,
YOU WILL FIND THE CHINESE
COMMUNIST PARTY DID A GOOD JOB
ON THAT.
BUT, ON THE OTHER HAND, ON THE
INTERNET, YOU WILL SEE THE FEAR
OF THE PARTY, THE OVER 155 KEY
WORDS BEING BANNED RELATING TO
THE TIANANMEN MASSACRE,
INCLUDING THE WORD -- THE
CHINESE WORD FOR "TODAY."
IF YOU SEARCH TIANANMEN TODAY ON
THE INTERNET, WILL SURFACE
MEMORIAL DISCUSSIONS AND
ARTICLES, THEREFORE, THEY BAN
THE SEARCH WORD.
>> Brown: YOU USE THE TERM
"PIVOT."
YOU TALK ABOUT TIANANMEN AS KIND
OF A KEY PIVOT LEADING FROM ONE
CHINA TO TODAY'S CHINA.
IN WHAT DAY DOES IT STILL MOVE
ON, REVERBERATE AND SHAPE WHAT
CHINA IS TODAY?
>> WELL, I THINK THE PARTY'S
POST TIANANMEN STRATEGY WAS
ABSOLUTELY INSTRUMENTAL IN
SHAPING THE CHINA WE SEE TODAY.
YOU KNOW, THE DECISION WAS MADE
TO ALLOW ECONOMIC LEGALIZATION
WITHOUT POLITICAL REFORM AND
THAT IS THE PATH THAT CHINA
FOLLOWS TO THIS DAY.
THE LEADER AT THE TIME MADE THE
DECISION MORE PATRIOTIC
EDUCATION WAS NEEDED AMONG THE
YOUTH.
THAT WAS HIS ONLY REGRET.
HE THOUGHT THAT WAS THE BIGGEST
LESSON OF TIANANMEN, THAT THEY
NEEDED TO KNOW MORE ABOUT THE
COUNTRY, WHAT IT HAD BEEN IN THE
PAST AND WHAT IT WAS AT THE
TIME.
THEY STARTED THIS ENORMOUS
PATRIOTIC CAMPAIGN WHICH
PRODUCED THIS GENERATION OF
YOUNG NATIONALISTS WE SEE TODAY.
THE OTHER BIG LEGACY FROM 1989
WAS THE BIRTH OF THE APPARATUS
WHICH INCLUDED MONITORING THE
INTERNET AND CENSORING IT AND
PUTTING DISSIDENTS UNDER HOUSE
ARREST OR SURVEILLANCE TO STOP
MASS INCIDENTS LIKE TIANANMEN
FROM HAPPENING AGAIN.
>> Brown: WE OFFER THE TERM
"GRAND BARGAIN" ESPECIALLY FOR
YOUNG PEOPLE, YOUNGER
GENERATIONS OF BEING OFFERED A
KIND OF ECONOMIC PROSPERITY IN
EXCHANGE FOR, IN ESSENCE, GIVING
UP A KIND OF POLITICAL FREEDOM.
IS THAT HOW ALL THIS HAS FELT OR
WORKED OUT FOR YOUNGER
GENERATION TODAY?
>> THAT IS A PART OF THE STORY,
IT'S A LOOK AT CHINA IN THE PAST
25 YEARS.
BUT I MUST SAY, TIANANMEN IS AN
UNFOLDING STORY.
WE HAVE NOT SEEN THE REAL ENDING
YET.
IT IS ONLY WORK SO MUCH.
WHERE IS INCREASING ECONOMIC AND
SOCIAL FREEDOM WITH A NEW
INDIVIDUALESTIC GENERATIONS
GROWING UP AND BECOMING MATURE
AND BECOMING MORE MIDDLE CLASS,
AND THE MORE DEMAND FOR
POLITICAL PARTICIPATION AND
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION AND
ASSOCIATION IS GROWING IN CHINA
AND ESPECIALLY THROUGH THE
INTERNET AND THE CELL PHONES TO
FACILITATE SUCH DEMAND AND
VOICES, AND I CAN SEE THAT AS A
TREND OVER THE PAST DECADE,
CLEARLY.
SO EVEN THERE IS A PARTY'S
EFFORT THAT TO ERASE THE MEMORY,
BUT THERE IS ANOTHER TREND WHICH
HAS COUNTERED THAT AND
EVENTUALLY WILL PREVAIL WHICH IS
THE PEOPLE, INCLUDING CHINESE
PEOPLE, HAVE TO LIVE IN THE
TRUTH.
THEY CANNOT COMPLETELY FORGET
THIS PART OF HISTORY BECAUSE
IT'S RIGHT AT THE HEART OF THE
NATION'S SOUL.
>> Brown: LOUISA, DID YOU SEE
THAT IN YOUR REPORTING FOR THIS
BOOK, THAT THE ECONOMIC
ASPIRATIONS ARE LEADING TO MORE
POLITICAL ASPIRATIONS AS WELL?
>> YES.
I MEAN, THERE IS CERTAINLY WE
ARE SEEING A GREAT DEAL MORE OF
MASS INCIDENTS AS THE CHINESE
YOU HAVE MYSTICALLY CALLED
PROTESTS BURSTING OUT ALL OVER
CHINA.
THE LAST FOR WHICH THERE WERE
OFFICIAL FIGURES WERE 2010 AND
THERE WERE 180,000 PROTESTS IN
CHINA.
I MEAN, THE ISSUES, SOME OF THEM
ARE DIFFERENT FROM THE ISSUES
BACK IN 1989.
NOWADAYS, THERE ARE A LOT OF
PROTESTS ABOUT LAND SEIZURES,
ABOUT ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS.
BUT THEN SOME OF THE ISSUES ARE
THE SAME, DEMAND FOR MORE
POLITICAL PARTICIPATION,
PROTESTS AGAINST LOCAL
CORRUPTION, AGAINST ABUSIVE
POWER AND AGAINST OFFICIAL
PROFITEERING.
AND I THINK THAT IS ONE REASON
WHY TIANANMEN AND THE EVENTS OFO
1989 REMAIN SO POTENT TODAY, THE
DEMANDS OF THOSE PROTESTERS
MARCHING IN 1989 ARE STILL
UNREALIZED, AND THEN MORE
PRESSING THAN EVER TODAY.
>> Brown: ALL RIGHT.
WE'LL LEAVE IT THERE.
LOUISA LIM AND
>> Woodruff: WE'LL BE RIGHT BACK
WITH A LOOK AT YESTERDAY'S
PRIMARY RESULTS.
BUT FIRST, IT'S PLEDGE WEEK ON
P.B.S.
>> Woodruff: AND NOW TO
POLITICS.
PRIMARY ELECTIONS TOOK PLACE IN
EIGHT STATES LAST NIGHT WITH
RESULTS IN KEY SENATE RACES IN
MISSISSIPPI AND IOWA.
BOTH COULD DETERMINE CONTROL OF
THE U.S. SENATE, BUT IN VERY
DIFFERENT WAYS.
HERE TO BREAK IT DOWN FOR US
AGAIN IS OUR POLITICAL EDITOR,
DOMENICO MONTANARO.
SO LET'S START WITH MISSISSIPPI
WHERE YOU HAD THAD UP AGAINST A
TEA PARTY CHALLENGER AND --
>> IT WAS FOUR DECADES, HE'S
BEEN AROUND FOR 42 YEARS IN
CONGRESS, AND THAT'S BEEN PART
OF THE PROBLEM.
AND WHAT HAPPENED WAS A LOT OF
THESE OUTSIDE GROUPS, TEA
PARTY-BACKED, SOME OF THE MORE
CONSERVATIVE GROUPS DECIDED THEY
NEEDED TO FIND SOMEBODY WHO THEY
FELT LIKE WAS A GOOD TARGET FOR
THEM, LINED OF LIKE RICHARD
LUGAR IN INDIANA IN 2012, AND
THEY FOUND IT WITH COCHRAN.
THEY HIGHLIGHTED SOME OF HIS
VOTES AND OUTSPENT HIM ON TV AND
MADE HIS LIFE DIFFICULT AND NOW
WE HAVE A DO-OVER RACE.
>> Woodruff: AND A RACE WHERE
THE TEA PARTY SEES THIS MAY BE
THEIR BEST CHANCE BECAUSE
THEY'VE HAD A ROUGH RIDE TRYING
TO WIN SOME OF THE OTHER
PRIMARIES.
>> THIS IS KIND OF LIKE A LAST
CHANCE.
I TALKED TO HALEY BARBOUR TODAY,
THE FORMER GOVERNOR OF
MISSISSIPPI, WHO SAID PEOPLE
NEED TO BE REMINDED THE OUTSIDE
GROUPS ARE THERE, THEY'RE NOT
CONCERNED ABOUT MISSISSIPPI,
THAT CHRIS McDANIEL WHO IS THE
STATE SENATOR GOING AGAINST
COCHRAN, IT WOULD BE AGAINST ALL
FEDERAL FUNDING FOR EDUCATION,
FOR EXAMPLE, AND THEY REALLY
FEEL LIKE THE GROUNDING WAS PART
OF THE PROBLEM FOR COCHRAN.
ONLY ABOUT TEN DAYS AGO WE
LEARNED THAT THE NATIONAL
REPUBLICAN SENATE COMMITTEE WAS
ABLE TO GET INTO MISSISSIPPI TO
HELP OUT WHEN THEY FOUND THAT
THE GROUND GAME WAS KIND OF
NON-EXISTENT.
WITHOUT THAT YOU MAY HAVE HAD
COCHRAN LOSE LAST NIGHT.
WE GOT TO THIS POINT WHERE HE IS
JUST BELOW 50 BECAUSE A THIRD
CANDIDATE WOUND UP WITH 1.5%.
THEY HAVE TO GET TO 50%.
SO WE'LL HAVE THREE MORE WEEKS
OF THIS.
ONE OPERATIVE TONIGHT TOLD ME
THEY EXPECT $5 MILLION TO
$7 MILLION MORE SPENT BETWEEN
BOTH SIDES OVER JUST THE NEXT
THREE WEEKS IN MISSISSIPPI,
WHICH IS A VERY INEXPENSIVE
STATE TO SPEND IN.
>> Woodruff: ARE ESTABLISHED
REPUBLICANS GOING TO BE AS
EXCITED ABOUT SUPPORTING THAD
COCHRAN NOW THAT HE'S IN THE
RUNOFF?
>> THAT'S?
$7 MILLION QUESTION.
THE PROBLEM IS THE TEA PARTY
ACTIVISTS WILL BE THERE.
YOU'RE SEE AGO LOT OF HANG
WRINGING AMONG ESTABLISHMENT
GROUPS, DO THEY WANT TO SPEND
THE MONEY IF THEY THINK
McDANIEL WILL WIN.
THE NRC IS ALL IN FOR COCHRAN.
THEY WON'T SAY THEY WILL SUPPORT
McDANIEL IF HE WINDS UP
WINNING.
THEY WANT TO PUT AS MANY
RESOURCES AS POSSIBLE INTO THE
GROUND GAME, KNOCK ON DOORS,
REMIND PEOPLE OF McDANIEL'S
RECORD, BECAUSE THEY REALLY SEE
THIS AS RACE THAT COULD HINGE ON
SENATE CONTROL AND DETERMINE
SENATE CONTROL BECAUSE THEY FEEL
LIKE PAST CONTROVERSIAL
STATEMENTS McDANIEL HAS MADE
COULD WIND UP HURTING OTHER UH
REPUBLICANS THROUGHOUT THE
COUNTRY, NOT JUST GIVE DEMOCRATS
A CHANCE IN MISSISSIPPI.
>> Woodruff: A DIFFERENT
SITUATION IN IOWA WHERE YOU HAVE
AN OPEN SEAT, ONE OF THE MOST
LIBERAL DEMOCRATS IN THE
COUNTRY, TOM HARKIN, RETIRING,
LEAVING IT OPEN.
THE REPUBLICAN RACE, YOU'VE GOT
A LARGE NUMBER OF CANDIDATES IN
THE RACE, AND THE REPUBLICAN
WITH I GUESS THE MOST MEMORABLE
TELEVISION AD IS THE ONE WHO WON
MORE THAN 50% OF THE VOTE.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
YOU KNOW, WE WERE TALKING ABOUT
WHETHER OR NOT SHE WOULD GET
PAST THE 35% THRESHOLD TO AVOID
A STATE CONVENTION WHERE PARTY
ACTIVISTS WOULD PICK THE
NOMINEE, ABOUT 2,000.
ERNST WON THE VOTE.
MARK JACOBS WAS IN THIRD.
HE WAS A GUY A LOT OF
REPUBLICANS IN WASHINGTON
THOUGHT WOULD BE THE PERSON TO
EMERGE, BUT WITH NIMBLE
CAMPAIGNING, JANIE ERNST
SEPARATED HERSELF.
>> Woodruff: WHAT KIND OF
CONTEST ARE PEOPLE EXPECTING
BETWEEN SHE AND BRUCE?
>> BRUCE IS FAVORED TO REPLACE
TOM HARKIN WHO WAS ONE OF THE
ARCHITECTS OF PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
HEALTHCARE LAW.
THIS IS A STATE THAT
DEMOGRAPHICALLY FAVORS DEMOCRATS
A BIT MORE, OF COURSE, THAN
MISSISSIPPI.
PRESIDENT OBAMA WON THE STATE
TWICE.
THERE'S 40% OF THE STATE THAT
ARE INDEPENDENT OR UNAFFILIATED
WITH DEMOCRATS OR REPUBLICANS,
AND THAT'S WHERE THIS BATTLE IS
GOING TO BE FOUGHT.
REPUBLICANS FEEL LIKE THIS ERNST
CAN USE THE MESSAGE OF
CONSERVATIVE WOMAN WHO WAS A
SOLDIER AND A MOM, THAT THAT CAN
REALLY WIN OVER SOME OF THOSE
INDEPENDENTS, AND BRAILEY HOPING
AT THE SAME TIME SOME OF THE
DEMOGRAPHICS OF THE STATE HELP
HIM.
>> Woodruff: WE'LL BE
WATCHING.
DOMENICO MONTANARO, THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: AGAIN, THE OTHER MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
THE TALIBAN APPARENTLY TAPED A
VIDEO SHOWING THE RELEASE OF
U.S. ARMY SERGEANT BOWE BERGDAHL
LAST SATURDAY, AS QUESTIONS
CONTINUED ABOUT HIS CAPTURE AND
THE DEAL THAT WON HIS FREEDOM.
AND PRESIDENT OBAMA MET WITH THE
INCOMING PRESIDENT OF UKRAINE IN
POLAND AND PROMISED U.S.
SUPPORT.
AND LATE TODAY, AN ATTORNEY FOR
DONALD STERLING SAID HE'S NOW
AGREED TO SELL THE LOS ANGELES
CLIPPERS BASKETBALL TEAM AND
DROP A LAWSUIT AGAINST THE
N.B.A.
>> Woodruff: ON THE NEWSHOUR
ONLINE RIGHT NOW, FROM THE LOOKS
OF IT, THERE'S A PARTY GOING ON
IN DEEP SPACE AND N.A.S.A.'S
HUBBLE TELESCOPE HAS THE PHOTOS.
THE AGENCY RELEASED IT'S LATEST
COMPOSITE IMAGE AND THE
CONFETTI-LIKE SNAPSHOT SHOWS THE
BROADEST SPECTRUM OF COLOR FROM
THIS REGION TO DATE.
SEE IT FOR YOURSELF, ON OUR
SCIENCE PAGE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
>> Ifill: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON THURSDAY WE DELVE INTO A
FORMER U.S. ATTORNEY'S
INVESTIGATION INTO HOW GENERAL
MOTORS MISHANDLED THE RECALL OF
MILLIONS OF IT'S CARS.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
WE'LL SEE YOU ON-LINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.